what extent does psychology affect performance in team sports?

What are team sports?
how am i defining team sports?
i will call team sports a physical activity you participate in with at least one other person on your side.
In what ways are cultures among team sports different?
generally speaking, team sports are quite competitive
however, there are different classes
i will use softball as the example becuz i know it the best
there are 3 classes in softball
house (c) rep b and rep a
Generally, house league is basically just for fun or when you are just starting out
rep b is for people who are pretty good, actually into the sport and playing competitively
rep a is for people who breathe eat and live softball, national type stuff
why is culture different?
in house league, a portion of players dont actually care enough to put in their full effort
there could be many reasons a player doesnt care but i find that a common reason for this is parent influence (e.g. forcing the athlete to be there)
thats why when you move up the ranks, you find less and less of those players
although i’ve known a girl in rep b who only played because of her friends
however thats still a motivating factor
typically, athletes in rep have a genuine passion for the sport or a strong motivating factor
this enables them to actually do their best
in summary, culture among the different levels is varied because of individual player differences in effort, passion and performance
why is performance an important part of team sports?
to understand why itn is an important component in team sports, we have to dive deeper into what performance is
What is performance?
definition
how is it measured?
if youre doing well or not
what does “doing ****well” mean?
in the case of sports, there is physical and mental well being
doing well physically basically means skill
pretty self explanatory
doing well mentally
this means not beating yourself up too much
not ruminating
its ok to feel bad but you need to pick yourself up after
without mental health its easier for physical health to deteriorate
Vice versa
Before I continue I'd like to introduce my pitching coach Kim. Could you tell us your qualifications?
Kim talks
Cool, what do you think is more important, mental health or physical health?
Kim talks
bad performance?
how to deal with it and improve?
need to pick yourself up and move past it, by coping
many categories of coping styles
we will be focusing on approach oriented and avoidance coping styles
approach oriented coping is when you try finding a solution to the problem, understanding its causes and accepting it
avoidance coping is when you avoid dealing with the situation directly or denying or minimizing the problem
in my opinion, dealing with a problem head on is better than avoiding it, because if you can solve it you dont have to keep running away from it
on that note, psychology plays a very big part in performance, and thats why its important we look at the psychology behind it.
What is Psychology?
definition
How does it apply to sports?
positivity in sports?
2015, there was a study conducted on 36 student athletes by Smith. The results indicated that student athletes who think more positively experience greater positive affect and less mental distress.
in my experience performance increases
negativity in sports?
in my experience, performance decreases
muscles tense
not in the right head space
everything becomes so much harder
as soon as you believe you cant do it you cant do it
weve gathered that being negative is bad, so how to stop being negative?
why is it so hard to change?
everyone thinks differently as everyone’s brains are different. however the brain is typically a negative thinker to some degree
what evidence have you gathered about that kim**?**
i find that the longer you've been negative the harder it is to change
How to not be negative Kim**?**
to train your brain you need to change neural pathways
How?
It takes time
you need to find a way to constantly remind yourself
to replace those bad neural pathways with good ones
does it work for everyone
everything absolutely depends on the person
what techniques works for others wont necessarily work for you
you have to find your own thing
whats the science behind it?
the emotions we feel are controlled by the amygdala
generally 2 categories (n & p)
negativity
when stressed/angry, cortisol is released
According to Kashouty (2021), “Stress is not all bad for your brain. In fact, moderate stress can actually improve brain performance by strengthening the connection between neurons in the brain.”
too much stress is harmful
acute vs acute episodic vs chronic
acute stress isnt all bad
chronic stress is tho
can cause depression, obesity, and heart issues
obesity caused by stress eating caused by cortisol
heart issues caused by long term high blood pressure
it also causes high blood pressure
i have experience with this
when i cry really hard due to stress usually i get a headache in the back of my head whihc is hypertension
College Student Journal conducted a study researching the effects of stress on student-athlete academics and enjoyment. This study concluded that “For all 96 participants (athletes and non-athletes combined), there was a statistically significant positive correlation between stress and GPA.”
HOWEVER when i get stressed i dont feel good. why?
cortisol is released with causes/goes hand in hand with flight or fight
adrenaline is released which can make some feel anxiety or panicked
however fight or flight heightens senses and allows some people to focus better and get work done
it really just depends on how you perceive stress
positivity
cortisol is decreased, and seritonin is increased
Synapses (areas connecting neurons) increase, in turn, raising mental productivity by improving cognition.
Intensifies ability to pay attention
Improves the ability to think and analyze incoming data
Different age groups?
started thinking about variables such as age
the brain develops over time so could mindset affect a kids psychology
should a child be going to a sports psychologist?
in an interview with sports psychologist and psychotherapist Burnett (2000), he stated that “If a child has identified a skill and is trying to improve that skill and honing his or her task, you know, getting better and better at it, then it certainly merits practicing and honing that skill. And sometimes, sessions with a psychologist can work in that area.”
also mentions wanting to make sure the kid is doing sports for the right reason, not parents pushing them.
what if kid is competitive naturally without parents pushing them? to what extent is being competitive unhealthy for a child?
experts states that “Competition comes from insecurity, not from strength. Wanting to "win" is an attempt to fill an emotional need. Since winning can never be complete and absolute, competing never fills the need from which it originates” (Kohn, 1992).
however, competition isnt always bad, as some people do perform under stress
this article applies more to young children
kids should be around 8-10 when starting sports competitivley so they can manage the pressure but all kids are different
kim, should a child be specializing in a sport at a young age**?**  