Hello! My name is Aaliyah and today I will be talking all about the age of exploration. We will be going over what is was, when it happened, a little timeline, some pros and cons, hardships, why europeans explored, and more. Lets dive into it!

The age of exploration, also known as the age of discovery,  was a time when a lot of people explored, predominantly Europeans. For the most part, the exploration was overseas. This era was very important in human history for reasons I'll cover later on.

The age of Discovery began in the late 1400s and ended in the early 1600s. It also takes place during the early modern period, and overlaps with the age of sail and the renaissance. The Renaissance was an important time in European history due to the great leaps in arts, math, and more.

In the 11th century, the Vikings explored many places, including the Americas. This means that Columbus was not the first European to discover the continent! Take that Columbus! When the Vikings arrived in Canada, they discovered the indigenous people already there, and did not settle.

The age of exploration began due to the Ottoman empire taking control of Constantinople. This limited trade for Europe by blocking access to some of their main trade routes, including ones to the area, North Africa, and the Red Sea. As a result, they had to start looking for other trade routes.

Christopher Columbus actually started the age of exploration by asking Portugal if they would fund an expedition to find another way to India, traveling westward instead of eastward. The Portuguese declined, as they didn't have sufficient funds, and they did not entirely believe in the idea.

The reason he wanted to go to India was for gold and spices. After getting turned down by Portugal, he asked Spain and was accepted. His first expedition led to his discovery of the  new world. After that point, he would inspire many other voyagers in the future.

As we were discussing earlier, the age of discovery ended in the early 17th century. This era resulted in the start of a LOT of history to come, as well as new inventions and discoveries. These allowed Europeans to travel more effectively. this brings us to our next point.

A few pros of the age of exploration, include more geographical knowledge, new technologies, and discovery of new flora and fauna. The Europeans discovered plants and animals such as those native to the American continent. However, along with the pros there were also cons. 

Some cons included the fact that the Europeans brought over many diseases when they were voyaging, such as smallpox, measles, the bubonic plague, malaria and more. It was very dangerous for them to sail for reasons I will discuss in the next slide.

In any age, you will never find one without hardships or cons. I guess you could say there were some areas of rough sailing ;). European hardships included inaccurate charts, leaky ships, and extreme weather on the ocean. They weren't, however the only ones to face adversity...

The indigenous people of the Americas also faced their fair share. This included diseases they have never encountered before, relocation from their homes, slavery, exploitation and more. Many of these things were a result of colonialization.

You may be asking yourself, "what was the point of all of this exploration? What were the Europeans' goal?" essentially, the Europeans wanted god, gold and glory. They wanted to spread their religion, and wanted to get rich from gold, silks, spices and various other goods.

How does this tie in with Canada? After the first voyages to the Americas, the French were the first Europeans to claim Canada. They had both positive and negative relations with different indigenous groups. They ended up interbreeding with some, resulting in the Metis people.

However, when New France was surrendered to Britain, things changed. The Hudson's bay company traded with the aboriginal people, not necessarily fairly at times. They were also a lot meaner to them in general. However, the arrival of the Brits shaped our society today.

There were few ways to navigate the ocean during that time. One way the Europeans navigated was using the portolan chart. The portolan chart is a nautical chart from the 13th century Mediterranean. These charts aid in the navigation of known yet out of sight land.

Portolan charts are made using pilot observations and compass directions. Pilot could either mean initial, or captain of the ship, like the cool guy to the right. It functions primarily on distance between ports, and a compass rose. They were often drawn on vellum.

On portolan charts there is always at least one compass rose, sometimes more. It shows the eight directions of wind, which are north, east, south, west, and the ordinal or intercardinal directions. From the compass rose(s), rhumb lines are drawn.

Rhumb lines are the lines you see all over the place. they are used to indicate wind direction more specifically the best point of sail for a vessel to reach a spot on the chart. Portolan charts in good condition now usually don't have rhumb lines, as they weren't taken to sea.

I'm sure you are wondering why should care about anything I just said. You should care because many new technologies such as the magnetic compass were invented, many previously undiscovered lands were mapped such as the Americas, and it was the start of Canadian history. Thanks for listening!