For me, summer break is a time when I get to sleep in, not having to fret about any sort of schoolwork. To feel the sun on my face, with a light breeze. Hanging out with friends, and spending time with family. Picking up a hobby or two, learning new skills. To me, that is the perfect summer.

 

But of course, nothing ever fully goes to plan. Last year, it was miserably hot outside. And inside. And everywhere. It’s tolerable at first, but after a week or so it just gets exhausting. There's not much you can do except lounge around inside, desperately finding ways to stay cool in the heat. Often I was confined to my parent's room, as it was the only one in the house with an AC Unit.

 

That didn’t stop us, though. It may have slowed or stopped plans at the beginning of summer, but the end was still salvageable. Camping wasn’t the same, with the campfire bans and all. Everything was dry, I'm sure it would only take so much as a considerable ember to light it all ablaze. Despite that, camping went fine and without a hitch.

 

Fast forward to this summer. The weather was debatable for another reason. There was rain in August! Overall very different from last year. I in fact learned many things and spent time with family and friends. It was still pretty hot near the end, but I’d say better than last year. I went for a week-long sailing trip on a 40-footer, which sparked my interest in sailing. I acquired my canSAIL1 certificate, and it turns out I can continue my canSAIL2 and 3 in Sea Cadets!

 

I also watched the Canada Cup this year which was super exciting. It was amazing watching international-level softball right here in South Surrey! That was earlier in the summer, though. I was supposed to go to Playland with my friends, but unfortunately, something was going around and I was a bit under the weather. I ended up going later with my family, so it all works out in the end.

 

Throughout the summer, I practiced a lot of pitching to prepare for softball tryouts. I am glad to say I improved a LOT. I'm proud of how I did at tryouts at the very beginning of the school year, but I didn’t make the cut. I tried out for reps A and B. I know I wasn’t ready for rep A, although I learned so much from the two days I was there. In terms of rep B, I think I had a good chance. Even though I’ll be in house league, I’ll use the time I’m there to further develop my skills for next year! I’ll also be playing with around 3-4 of my friends.

 

In conclusion, this summer was practically a perfect summer. Of course, there were still hitches along the way, but all little matters in the grand scheme of things, Live goes on, and the universe will unfold as it should. I believe that everything happens for a reason. Thanks for reading!